[Spec] Windows Package Manager Repair functionality Design spec (#3943)
microsoft/winget-cli: doc/specs/#148 - Repair Support.md

  - Msix : The repair command will use the built-in repair features of the MSIX installer type. It will make an MSIX API call to register the application package, which will attempt to repair the package.
    > We can't do the same thing as setting app repair for MSIX app right now because we can't use the private APIs that it uses to do repair operations with winget.
  - MSStore : The repair command will make an MSStore API  [StartProductInstallAsync](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/windows.applicationmodel.store.preview.installcontrol.appinstallmanager.startproductinstallasync?view=winrt-22621) call to repair the application with 'Repair' property of AppInstallOption set to true.

### Repair Feature for Installer Types that require Custom Repair Switch
  - Burn, Exe, Nullsoft & Inno : The custom switch for repair in the YAML manifest file will be used to perform the repair. The repair command will run the installer with the custom switch to repair the application. To have enough flexibility, different options are possible depending on the installer source used for repair. 
   - Installed Source: 

>      - If the YAML manifest file specifies the `Repair` switch and `Modify` as the `RepairBehavior`, the repair command will use the modify command in the ARP `ModifyPath` registry key, along with the repair switch, through a ShellExecute call, as long as `NoModify` and `NoRepair` ARP registry flags are not set to 1.

Reviewer: To confirm, installers like the [GDK](https://github.com/microsoft/winget-pkgs/tree/master/manifests/m/Microsoft/GDK), that have modify disabled, should automatically do the right thing? 

Also am I correct that for now straight "modify" is not being supported, as in adding/removing functionality. We are just using modify if we need to trigger it for repair?

Author: **Answer for the first question:**
We intend to model the winget repair feature after the modify (repair) flow in the settings app. I think the settings app will either have no option to modify or the option will be disabled for the installers that do not support modify. Therefore, I expect that the 'NoModify' ARP will be set in this scenario and winget will not be able to repair from the modify flow.

The probable solution for the installers that do not support modify but support repair would be to set 'RepairBehavior' as 'Installer' and pass in the 'Repair' switch. In this case, winget will download the matching installer from the remote source and execute it with the repair switch. Is this an acceptable solution for GDK?

**Answer for the second question:**
You are correct, we are not supporting direct "modify". For the cases where 'Modify' is supported, we plan to trigger the modify flow by executing the installer that 'ModifyPath' ARP points to with the repair switch appended to it to activate the repair functionality.

Reviewer: Clarification on the first question; add/remove apps has modify and uninstall. The modify UX just does not have modify. 
![image](https://github.com/microsoft/winget-cli/assets/1520739/92497494-08b3-4a09-8f44-cf4db6bb8c5d)

## Inspiration

The motivation for creating a repair feature in the Windows Package Manager is to provide users with a convenient and consistent way to fix their malfunctioning applications, regardless of the installer type. Currently, users have to rely on different methods to repair their applications, such as using the Windows Settings app, the Control Panel, the command line, or the application's own repair tool. These methods are not always available, accessible, or intuitive, and they may vary depending on the application and the installer type. The repair feature aims to provide a unified experience for users to repair their applications, regardless of the installer type.

## Solution Design

### Repair Command Syntax
`winget repair <appname>`

> will initiate the repair of the application whose name matches the search results.The command will display an error message if the application is not installed. The command will attempt to repair the application if it is installed. The command will display a success message if the repair succeeds. The command will display an error message if the repair fails.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
will initiate the repair of the specified package. The command will display an error message if the application is not installed. The command will attempt to repair the application if it is installed. The command will display a success message if the repair succeeds. The command will display an error message if the repair fails.
```

### Repair Feature for different Installer Types with Native Repair Capabilities
  - Msi, Wix : The repair command will use the built-in repair features of the MSI installer type. It will run the msiexec command with the default [repair options](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/administration/windows-commands/msiexec#repair-options) to repair the application using a ShellExecute call or by invoking [MsiReinstallProduct](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/msi/nf-msi-msireinstallproductw) API call with `REINSTALLMODE` mode property set.

>   - Msix : The repair command will use the built-in repair features of the MSIX installer type. It will make an MSIX API call to register the application package, which will usually fix the application as much as possible. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Msix : The repair command will use the built-in repair features of the MSIX installer type. It will make an MSIX API call to register the application package, which will attempt to repair the package. 
```

   - Installed Source: If the YAML manifest file has the 'ModifyRepair' switch, the repair command will use the modify command in the ARP 'ModifyPath' registry key with the repair switch through a ShellExecute call.
   - Remote Source: If the YAML manifest file has the 'InstallerRepair' switch, the repair command will get the matching installer from the remote source and use the repair switch on the downloaded installer through a ShellExecute call.
      > If neither switch is specified, the repair command will display an error message.

> Note: The initial implementation will not support repair for Nullsoft, Inno, Portables installer types. Based on feedback from the community, we may add the repair feature for these installer types in a future release.

## Manifest Changes
Addition of `ModifyRepair` property to InstallerSwitch
- The `ModifyRepair` property is used to define the custom repair option that works with ModifyPath ARP entry for those installer types that have ModifyPath ARP entry and allow repair through Modify flow.

Addition of `InstallerRepair` property to InstallerSwitch

> -  With the `InstallerRepair` switch, the installer that matches the remote source is downloaded and then repaired by using ShellExecute to call the repair switch on the downloaded installer.

Reviewer 3: Also - some packages don't have a dedicated modify exe, but instead use the uninstaller. Take for example `Microsoft.DotNet.DesktopRuntime.6` - where the `UninstallString` is the same as `ModifyPath` This is a case where it has been done "correctly" and the `ModifyPath` has been set but it is possible, and likely probable, that some publisher out there is only using the `UninstallString` for the modify / repair flow. This would make it easy to add `RepairType: Uninstaller` which would call the `UninstallString` with the appropriate switch, rather than requiring a new `InstallerSwitch`

> -  With the `InstallerRepair` switch, the installer that matches the remote source is downloaded and then repaired by using ShellExecute to call the repair switch on the downloaded installer.

Author: To answer the first question, we designed `ModifyRepair `and `InstallerRepair `to enable some flexibility around the source of the installer that can apply the repair switch.

`ModifyRepair `- This switch is mainly for the Modify flow from the settings apps, which in most cases would use a cached local installer to enter the modify flow and repair.

`InstallerRepair `- This switch allows the repair switch to be applied on a matching installer from a remote source. That is, we select a matching installer from the manifest that defines the `InstallerRepair `switch, then download that installer and use it for the repair operation. This adds more value for scenarios such as:

1. We need a complete installer to perform the repair operation and the cached installer on the local machine is incomplete for some reason.
2. The local package cache is missing or corrupted.
3. We want to have some control over the mapping between the installer and the repair switch if this becomes important at some point.

By the way, I like your idea of using a single switch for `Repair`, and a separate `RepairType `field that controls the behavior. This gives more flexibility and extensibility to the existing design, considering we are discovering multiple ways to trigger the repair behavior, such as `Installer, Modify, Uninstaller` etc.

I will update the design document with these feedback.

## Manifest Validation

> - `ModifyRepair` and `InstallerRepair` switches are only valid for Burn/Exe installer types.

Author: I agree that a warning is more appropriate than an error for installer types that support custom repair switches, instead of the default experience. However, I wonder if this warning scenario should only apply to limited installer types, such as MSI/Wix and Burn/Exe, that may involve custom repair switch scenarios. For other installer types, such as MSIX/MSStore, Nullsoft, Inno, or portables, showing an error may be more sensible, since the repair action is either to invoke platform APIs or to uninstall and/or reinstall. This way, we can avoid possible manifest inconsistencies.

Please share your thoughts on this.

> - `ModifyRepair` and `InstallerRepair` switches are only valid for Burn/Exe installer types.

Reviewer 3: I think that makes sense, especially since there shouldn't be switches which affect the API's behaviors or a reinstall

- `ModifyRepair` and `InstallerRepair` switches are mutually exclusive.

## Supported Repair Scenarios
- Repair for installed applications of Msi, Wix, Msix and MSStore installer types.
- Repair for the application using the custom repair switch specified in the YAML manifest file for Burn/Exe installer types.
  -  The �ModifyRepair� switch when using the ModifyPath ARP entry for repair.
  -  The `InstallerRepair' switch when using the remote installer source for repair.

## Potential Issues

> - Repair for Nullsoft, Inno, Portables installer types are not supported in the initial implementation.

Author: Instead of mentioning this as a potential issue, I should have included it in the future consideration section.I will leave this blank for the time being.

  - the repair command will not work if the installer does not have a custom repair switch specified in the YAML manifest file.
  - the repair command will not work if the installed Burn/Exe installer type doesn't correlated to the remote installer type that has a custom repair switch specified in the YAML manifest file.

> ## Future considerations

Author: I think that `NoModify :1` and `ModifyPath `are mutually exclusive, so handling `ModifyPath `would also cover `NoModify`. However, we can check both `NoModify `and `ModifyPath` combination for extra safety, as they control the Modify flow in the **Setting apps**.

Regarding `NoRepair:1` - I found that different installer types do not use this flag consistently. For some standard installers like MSI/Wix, the publisher may have set this flag, but we could still run standard repair operation via msiexec for some installer types. Moreover, the platform does not seem to have a consistent way of handling the `NoRepair : 1/0` flag. This flag is apparently an optional feature that publishers can apply to indicate that they do not officially support repair.

> ## Future considerations

Author: We should explore real-world scenarios where the requirements for modifying elevation differ from those for installation. 
Currently, our design assumes that the requirements for modification elevation align with those for installation, similar to uninstallation. 

The expectation/assumption for "when a non-elevated session attempts to modify a package installed for machine scope", the installer will prompt for elevation appears to be the case with some sample runs. However, when a package installed for user scope is run in an admin context, the repair operation is restricted due to possible security risks.

## Inspiration

The motivation for creating a repair feature in the Windows Package Manager is to provide users with a convenient and consistent way to fix their malfunctioning applications, regardless of the installer type. Currently, users have to rely on different methods to repair their applications, such as using the Windows Settings app, the Control Panel, the command line, or the application's own repair tool. These methods are not always available, accessible, or intuitive, and they may vary depending on the application and the installer type. The repair feature aims to provide a unified experience for users to repair their applications, regardless of the installer type.

## Solution Design

> ### Repair Command Syntax

Reviewer 3: What flags / query options will be available with `repair`?

`--manifest` ?
`--version` ?
`--architecture` ?
`--source` ?
`--interactive`  / `--silent` ?
`--override` / `--custom` ?
`--log` ?
`--locale` ?
`--accept-source-agreements` ?

Author: I have updated the design document with the initial set of queries and options that we can support for the repair feature. I have excluded the override and custom options from the initial scope, and we can cover them in the future as we understand how important they are for the repair. For now, they seem to be unnecessary.
